Dual stack 1.20 docs update (#24725)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/services-networking/dual-stack.md

<!-- overview -->

> {{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.20" state="alpha" >}}

Reviewer: BTW it's actually OK to leave this line unchanged.

Reviewer: In the text of the page, signpost readers to read the version of this page for _their_ version of Kubernetes - so that they are viewing accurate documentation for this alpha feature.

Reviewer 2: This is an unusual case as this enhancement has been reimplemented in Kubernetes 1.20 and any docs prior to 1.20 (1.16 though 1.19) are incorrect. Given that, how do you suggest we signal that these docs only are relevant to this version of this alpha enhancement and not the prior implementation?

Reviewer: My suggestion for this is / was: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/24725#discussion_r516152624

If people are using v1.18 and read the v1.18 docs, the two should match.

Enabling IPv4/IPv6 dual-stack on your Kubernetes cluster provides the following features:

   * Dual-stack Pod networking (a single IPv4 and IPv6 address assignment per Pod)
   * IPv4 and IPv6 enabled Services
   * Pod off-cluster egress routing (eg. the Internet) via both IPv4 and IPv6 interfaces

## Prerequisites

The following prerequisites are needed in order to utilize IPv4/IPv6 dual-stack Kubernetes clusters:

>    * Kubernetes 1.20 or later (Dual-stack as alpha was re-implemented in 1.20)

Reviewer 3: This might confuse some people, we only re implemented the service part.

Author: Okay. How do you suggest we communicate that these docs only apply in full to the 1.20 version, and may be incorrect for the first alpha? (As far as I understand it, we do not intend to maintain docs for the first alpha implementation.)

Reviewer: My suggestion for this is / was: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/24725#discussion_r516152624

Author: We've implemented @sftim's suggestion.

## Services

If your cluster has dual-stack enabled, you can create {{< glossary_tooltip text="Services" term_id="service" >}} which can use IPv4, IPv6, or both. 

> Services will default to the address family of the first service cluster IP range configured  via the `--service-cluster-ip-range` flag to the kube-controller-manager.

Reviewer 3: This does not cover:

1. Existing Services (default to single stack + family of whatever IP assigned to that service)
2. Existing services (headless w/selector)
3. The ability to upgrade and downgrade services.

Reviewer 2: Thanks Kal. We will work on added these sections

Author: Added as requested

> If you want to explicitly specify which IP address is the primary IP address (which is the address assigned for the Service as `.spec.ClusterIP`), you can optionally use the `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` field. This field accepts one of the following values:

Reviewer 3: `s/IP address/IP address family/`

Not to be confused with user ability to select an actual IP for their services.

Author: We now say:
```
If your cluster has dual-stack enabled, you can create {{< glossary_tooltip text="Services" term_id="service" >}} which can use IPv4, IPv6, or both. 

The address family of a Service defaults to the address family of the first service cluster IP range (configured via the `--service-cluster-ip-range` flag to the kube-controller-manager).
```

   * The `.spec.ipFamilies` field is an array that accepts element values of `IPv4` and `IPv6`
   * The `.spec.ipFamilies` array field accepts one or more of the following element values:
      * `IPv4`: The API server will assign an IP from a `service-cluster-ip-range` that is `ipv4`
      * `IPv6`: The API server will assign an IP from a `service-cluster-ip-range` that is `ipv6`

### Example dual-stack Service configurations

Let's look at several examples to demonstrate the behavior of various dual-stack Service configurations.

   * This Service specification does not explicitly define `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy`. Kubernetes will assign a cluster IP for the Service from the first configured `service-cluster-ip-range` and set the `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` to `SingleStack`. [Services without selectors](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#services-without-selectors) and [Headless Services](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#headless-services) with selectors will behave in this same way.

{{< codenew file="service/networking/dual-stack-default-svc.yaml" >}}

>    * This Service specification explicitly defines `PreferDualStack` in `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy`. Kubernetes will assign both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses (as this cluster has dual-stack enabled) and select the `.spec.ClusterIP` from the list of `.spec.ClusterIPs` based on the address family of the first element in the `.spec.ipFamilies` array. Specifying `RequireDualStack` in `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` on a cluster with dual-stack enabled behaves the same way.

Reviewer: Is this accurate?
```suggestion
This Service specification explicitly defines `PreferDualStack` in `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy`.
When you create this Service on a dual-stack cluster, Kubernetes assigns both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses for the service. The control plane updates the `.spec` for the Service to record the IP address assignments. The field `.spec.ClusterIPs` is the primary record, and contains both assigned IP addresses; `.spec.ClusterIP` is a secondary field with its value calculated from `.spec.ClusterIPs`.  
For the `.spec.ClusterIP` field, the control plane records the IP address that is the same address family as the cluster's main IP address family. 

On a single-stack cluster, the `.spec.ClusterIPs` and `.spec.ClusterIP` fields both only list one address.
On a cluster with dual-stack enabled, specifying `RequireDualStack` in `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` behaves the same as `PreferDualStack`.
```

{{< codenew file="service/networking/dual-stack-preferred-svc.yaml" >}}

This Service specification explicitly defines `IPv6` and `IPv4` in `.spec.ipFamilies` as well as defining `PreferDualStack` in `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy`. Kubernetes will assign an IPv6 and IPv4 address in `.spec.ClusterIPs` and `.spec.ClusterIP` will be set to the IPv6 address because it is the first element in the `.spec.ClusterIPs` array. 

{{< codenew file="service/networking/dual-stack-preferred-ipfamilies-svc.yaml" >}}

### Headless Services without selector

> For [Headless Services without selectors](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#without-selectors) and without `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` explicitly set, the `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` field will default to `RequireDualStack`.

Reviewer: Wording nit
```suggestion
For [Headless Services without selectors](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#without-selectors) and without `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` explicitly set, the `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` field defaults to `RequireDualStack`.
```

### Service Type LoadBalancer

To provision a dual-stack LoadBalancer for your Service:
   * Set the `.spec.type` field to `LoadBalancer`
   * Set `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` field to `PreferDualStack` or `RequireDualStack`

{{< note >}}

> IPv6-enabled external load balancers must be supported by your cloud provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use a dual-stack `LoadBalancer` type Service, your cloud provider must support IPv4 and IPv6 load balancers.
```
?

{{< /note >}}

## Egress Traffic

> Either publicly routable or non-publicly routable IPv6 address blocks will work if the underlying {{< glossary_tooltip text="CNI" term_id="cni" >}} provider implements the transport. If you have a Pod that uses non-publicly routable IPv6 addresses and want that Pod to reach off-cluster destinations (eg. the public Internet), you must set up IP masquerading for the egress traffic. The [ip-masq-agent](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/ip-masq-agent) project supports dual-stack for IP masquerading on dual-stack clusters.

Reviewer: Is masquerading the only option?
```suggestion
Either publicly routable or non-publicly routable IPv6 address blocks will work if the underlying {{< glossary_tooltip text="CNI" term_id="cni" >}} provider implements the transport. If you have a Pod that uses non-publicly routable IPv6 addresses and want that Pod to reach off-cluster destinations (eg. the public Internet), you must set up IP masquerading for the egress traffic, or a similar mechanism such as transparent proxying. The [ip-masq-agent](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/ip-masq-agent) project supports dual-stack for IP masquerading on dual-stack clusters.
```

## Services

If your cluster has dual-stack enabled, you can create {{< glossary_tooltip text="Services" term_id="service" >}} which can use IPv4, IPv6, or both. 

The address family of a Service defaults to the address family of the first service cluster IP range (configured via the `--service-cluster-ip-range` flag to the kube-controller-manager).

When you define a Service you can optionally configure it as dual stack. To specify the behavior you want, you
set the `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` field to one of the following values:

>    * `SingleStack`: Single-stack service. The control plane allocates a cluster IP for the Service, using the first configured service cluster IP range.

Reviewer 4: nit: I think you do not need to indent the list.

   * `RequireDualStack`: Allocates Service `.spec.ClusterIPs` from both IPv4 and IPv6 address ranges 
      * Selects the `.spec.ClusterIP` from the list of `.spec.ClusterIPs` based on the address family of the first element in the `.spec.ipFamilies` array. The cluster must have dual-stack networking configured.

If you would like to define which IP family to use for single stack or define the order of IP families for dual-stack, you can choose the address families by setting an optional field, `.spec.ipFamilies`, on the Service. 

{{< note >}}
The `.spec.ipFamilies` field is immutable because the `.spec.ClusterIP` cannot be reallocated on a Service that already exists. If you want to change `.spec.ipFamilies`, delete and recreate the Service.
{{< /note >}}

You can set `.spec.ipFamilies` to any of the following array values:

- `["IPv4"]`
- `["IPv6"]`
- `["IPv4","IPv6"]` (dual stack)
- `["IPv6","IPv4"]` (dual stack)

The first family you list is used for the legacy `.spec.ClusterIP` field.

### Dual-stack Service configuration scenarios

These examples demonstrate the behavior of various dual-stack Service configuration scenarios.

#### Dual-stack options on new Services

>    1. This Service specification does not explicitly define `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy`. When you create this Service, Kubernetes assigns a cluster IP for the Service from the first configured `service-cluster-ip-range` and sets the `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` to `SingleStack`. ([Services without selectors](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#services-without-selectors) and [headless Services](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#headless-services) with selectors will behave in this same way.)

Reviewer 4: You can remove the indentation of this list.
If you want a numbered list, you can use:

1. item 1
1. item 2
1. item 3

Reviewer: The source for that Markdown would look like
```markdown
1. item 1
1. item 2
1. item 3
```

Author: Enough elements between that 1. 1. 1. doesn't work in this case.

{{< codenew file="service/networking/dual-stack-default-svc.yaml" >}}

   2. This Service specification explicitly defines `PreferDualStack` in `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy`. When you create this Service on a dual-stack cluster, Kubernetes assigns both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses for the service. The control plane updates the `.spec` for the Service to record the IP address assignments. The field `.spec.ClusterIPs` is the primary field, and contains both assigned IP addresses; `.spec.ClusterIP` is a secondary field with its value calculated from `.spec.ClusterIPs`. 
   
      * For the `.spec.ClusterIP` field, the control plane records the IP address that is from the same address family as the first service cluster IP range. 
      * On a single-stack cluster, the `.spec.ClusterIPs` and `.spec.ClusterIP` fields both only list one address. 
      * On a cluster with dual-stack enabled, specifying `RequireDualStack` in `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` behaves the same as `PreferDualStack`.

{{< codenew file="service/networking/dual-stack-preferred-svc.yaml" >}}

>    3. This Service specification explicitly defines `IPv6` and `IPv4` in `.spec.ipFamilies` as well as defining `PreferDualStack` in `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy`. Kubernetes will assign an IPv6 and IPv4 address in `.spec.ClusterIPs` and `.spec.ClusterIP` will be set to the IPv6 address because it is the first element in the `.spec.ClusterIPs` array, overriding the default. 

Reviewer 4: What do you think about this edit:
When Kubernetes assigns an IPv6 and IPv4 address in `.spec.ClusterIPs`, the `.spec.ClusterIP` field is set to the IPv6 address because it is the first element in the `.spec.ClusterIPs` array, overriding the default.

{{< codenew file="service/networking/dual-stack-preferred-ipfamilies-svc.yaml" >}}

#### Dual-stack defaults on existing Services

These examples demonstrate the default behavior when dual-stack is newly enabled on a cluster where Services already exist.

>    1. When dual-stack is enabled on a cluster, existing Services (whether `IPv4` or `IPv6`) are configured by the control plane to set `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` to `SingleStack` and set `.spec.ipFamilies` to the address family of the existing Service. The existing Service cluster IP will be stored in `.spec.ClusterIPs`. 

Reviewer 4: You can remove the indentation?

{{< codenew file="service/networking/dual-stack-default-svc.yaml" >}}

   You can validate this behavior by using kubectl to inspect an existing service.

```yaml

> kubectl get svc my-service -o yaml

Reviewer: BTW this line isn't YAML. See https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#separate-commands-from-output for how the style guide recommends showing commands and their output.

apiVersion: v1

> kind: Service

Reviewer 4: nit: Is this YAML the output from the `kubectl get` command?

Author: We revised a bit, but this does need to be explained.

metadata:
  labels:
    app: MyApp
  name: my-service
spec:
  clusterIP: 10.0.197.123
  clusterIPs:
  - 10.0.197.123
  ipFamilies:
  - IPv4
  ipFamilyPolicy: SingleStack
  ports:
  - port: 80
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 80
  selector:
    app: MyApp
  type: ClusterIP
status:
  loadBalancer: {}
```

   2. When dual-stack is enabled on a cluster, existing [headless Services](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#headless-services) with selectors are configured by the control plane to set `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` to `SingleStack` and set `.spec.ipFamilies` to the address family of the first service cluster IP range (configured via the `--service-cluster-ip-range` flag to the kube-controller-manager) even though `.spec.ClusterIP` is set to `None`. 

{{< codenew file="service/networking/dual-stack-default-svc.yaml" >}}

   You can validate this behavior by using kubectl to inspect an existing headless service with selectors.

```yaml

> kubectl get svc my-service -o yaml

Reviewer: This line isn't YAML

apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  labels:
    app: MyApp
  name: my-service
spec:
  clusterIP: None

>   clusterIPs:

Reviewer 4: nit: Do you need to show the full YAML?

Author: We think it's needed here for clarity.

  - None
  ipFamilies:
  - IPv4
  ipFamilyPolicy: SingleStack
  ports:
  - port: 80
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 80
  selector:
    app: MyApp
```

#### Switching Services between single-stack and dual-stack

Services can be changed from single-stack to dual-stack and from dual-stack to single-stack.

>    1. To change a Service from single-stack to dual-stack, change `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` from `SingleStack` to `PreferDualStack` or `RequireDualStack` as desired. When you change this Service from single-stack to dual-stack, Kubernetes assigns the missing address family so that the Service now has IPv4 and IPv6 addresses.

Reviewer 4: nit: remove indentation of list

   Edit the Service specification updating the `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` from `SingleStack` to `PreferDualStack`.

Before:
```yaml
spec:
  ipFamilyPolicy: SingleStack
```
After:
```yaml
spec:
  ipFamilyPolicy: PreferDualStack
```

   2. To change a Service from dual-stack to single-stack, change `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` from `PreferDualStack` or `RequireDualStack` to `SingleStack`. When you change this Service from dual-stack to single-stack, Kubernetes retains only the first element in the `.spec.ClusterIPs` array, and sets `.spec.ClusterIP` to that IP address and sets `.spec.ipFamilies` to the address family of `.spec.ClusterIPs`.

### Headless Services without selector

For [Headless Services without selectors](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#without-selectors) and without `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` explicitly set, the `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` field defaults to `RequireDualStack`.

> ### Service Type LoadBalancer

Reviewer 4: nit: Service type load balancer?

Author: As we're talking about a Service of this LoadBalancer type, we tried to keep the capitalization as it is in the other docs and code: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#loadbalancer

> To provision a dual-stack LoadBalancer for your Service:

Reviewer 4: nit: load balancer vs LoadBalancer?

Author: See above - https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#loadbalancer

   * Set the `.spec.type` field to `LoadBalancer`
   * Set `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` field to `PreferDualStack` or `RequireDualStack`

{{< note >}}
To use a dual-stack `LoadBalancer` type Service, your cloud provider must support IPv4 and IPv6 load balancers.
{{< /note >}}

> ## Egress Traffic

Reviewer 4: s/Egress Traffic/Egress traffic

> Either publicly routable or non-publicly routable IPv6 address blocks will work if the underlying {{< glossary_tooltip text="CNI" term_id="cni" >}} provider implements the transport. If you have a Pod that uses non-publicly routable IPv6 addresses and want that Pod to reach off-cluster destinations (eg. the public Internet), you must set up IP masquerading for the egress traffic, or a similar mechanism such as transparent proxying. The [ip-masq-agent](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/ip-masq-agent) project supports dual-stack for IP masquerading on dual-stack clusters.

Reviewer 4: nit: What are the other options that "work" besides publicly or non-publicly routable?
In other words, could you say, "all routable IPv6 address blocks are routed if the underlying ..."

Author: Okay, have clarified and condensed this point. Thanks.

{{< /note >}}

You can set `.spec.ipFamilies` to any of the following array values:

- `["IPv4"]`
- `["IPv6"]`
- `["IPv4","IPv6"]` (dual stack)
- `["IPv6","IPv4"]` (dual stack)

The first family you list is used for the legacy `.spec.ClusterIP` field.

### Dual-stack Service configuration scenarios

These examples demonstrate the behavior of various dual-stack Service configuration scenarios.

#### Dual-stack options on new Services

1. This Service specification does not explicitly define `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy`. When you create this Service, Kubernetes assigns a cluster IP for the Service from the first configured `service-cluster-ip-range` and sets the `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` to `SingleStack`. ([Services without selectors](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#services-without-selectors) and [headless Services](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#headless-services) with selectors will behave in this same way.)

{{< codenew file="service/networking/dual-stack-default-svc.yaml" >}}

> 1. This Service specification explicitly defines `PreferDualStack` in `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy`. When you create this Service on a dual-stack cluster, Kubernetes assigns both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses for the service. The control plane updates the `.spec` for the Service to record the IP address assignments. The field `.spec.ClusterIPs` is the primary field, and contains both assigned IP addresses; `.spec.ClusterIP` is a secondary field with its value calculated from `.spec.ClusterIPs`.

Reviewer 4: Hi @bridgetkromhout .
If you have time, I think the list numbering will work if you indent the "codenew" shortcode (4 spaces).

Author: Thanks. Let's catch the refactoring after we get all the content locked!

Reviewer 5: @kbhawkey @bridgetkromhout - i saw some lints mentioned in the project structure.will one such exists help on these here?

{{< codenew file="service/networking/dual-stack-default-svc.yaml" >}}

1. This Service specification explicitly defines `PreferDualStack` in `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy`. When you create this Service on a dual-stack cluster, Kubernetes assigns both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses for the service. The control plane updates the `.spec` for the Service to record the IP address assignments. The field `.spec.ClusterIPs` is the primary field, and contains both assigned IP addresses; `.spec.ClusterIP` is a secondary field with its value calculated from `.spec.ClusterIPs`.
   
      * For the `.spec.ClusterIP` field, the control plane records the IP address that is from the same address family as the first service cluster IP range. 
      * On a single-stack cluster, the `.spec.ClusterIPs` and `.spec.ClusterIP` fields both only list one address. 
      * On a cluster with dual-stack enabled, specifying `RequireDualStack` in `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy` behaves the same as `PreferDualStack`.

{{< codenew file="service/networking/dual-stack-preferred-svc.yaml" >}}

> 1. This Service specification explicitly defines `IPv6` and `IPv4` in `.spec.ipFamilies` as well as defining `PreferDualStack` in `.spec.ipFamilyPolicy`. When Kubernetes assigns an IPv6 and IPv4 address in `.spec.ClusterIPs`, `.spec.ClusterIP` is set to the IPv6 address because that is the first element in the `.spec.ClusterIPs` array, overriding the default.

Reviewer 6: Numbers are not incrementing as expected as shown here https://5fab100b181c9c0007af911f--kubernetes-io-vnext-staging.netlify.app/docs/concepts/services-networking/dual-stack/

Could you change to make sure page generates as expected?

Author: Thanks. I think that's one of the stylistic changes @sftim intends to reformat.
